
https://www.makeuseof.com/use-autokey-to-automate-repetitive-tasks-on-linux/

 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------





        ow to Use AutoKey to Automate Repetitive Tasks on Linux





By Yash Wate
Published Jul 25, 2021

Play smart and set up phrases and scripts with AutoKey to automate basic tasks
on a Linux machine.



Readers like you help support MUO. When you make a purchase using links on our
site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Read More.

AutoKey is a scripting application for Linux. It lets you automate repetitive
and trivial operations on your computer so you can perform them quickly and
efficiently.

Some of the tasks where AutoKey serves well include text expansion, correcting
typos, launching programs, and inserting boilerplate texts. Besides, you can
also use it to run custom scripts to automate complex system actions on your
machine.

That said, though, AutoKey can be intimidating to its first-time users. To this
end, here's a guide to help you install, set up, and use AutoKey on Linux.

What Is AutoKey?

AutoKey is a free and open-source desktop automation utility for Linux. It
allows you to automate various repetitive operations on your computer using
hotkeys or trigger phrases so you can perform them efficiently.

If you're just starting with AutoKey, text expansion and auto-correction are
two applications where the software can prove to be of good use to you. And
over time, as you get comfortable with AutoKey and develop an understanding of
scripting concepts and their intricacies, you should be able to use it to
execute Python scripts to automate complex tasks.

How to Install AutoKey on Linux

AutoKey is available for all major Linux distros and comes in two versions:
autokey-gtk and autokey-qt.

For the uninitiated, GTK and Qt are toolkits used for developing GUI-based apps
for Linux. Of the two, GTK is the preferred choice for GNOME-style programs,
while Qt is the standard option for creating programs for KDE. Besides the
change in cosmetics, though, the programs created with GTK and Qt both share
the same internal structure at large.

So, depending on which Linux distro you're using on your computer, you can
decide to download either the GTK or the Qt version of AutoKey.

Related: What's the Difference Between GTK+ and Qt

For this, too, you have two options. You can either use the package manager,
which comes pre-installed in your Linux distro, for a quick installation. Or,
you can use pip, in case you want the latest version of AutoKey.

However, the recommended choice is to install AutoKey using a package manager
since it offers a much easier and friendly installation process than pip.
Follow the steps below to install AutoKey on your computer.

On Debian (Ubuntu, Mint, Elementary)

To install AutoKey on Debian-based Linux distributions, run the following
command in the terminal:

 sudo apt install autokey-gtk

For installing autokey-qt, enter:

 sudo apt install autokey-qt

On Fedora

Install AutoKey on Fedora using:

 sudo dnf install autokey-gtk

On Arch Linux

AutoKey is available on Arch Linux via AUR (Arch User Repository). So you can
install it by running:

 yay -Syy autokey-gtk

AutoKey Initial Run

With AutoKey installed, go to the application menu and launch the program. When
it opens, the system will greet you with the main window that's split into two
sections: the left pane helps you navigate through phrases and scripts, whereas
the right allows you to preview and build/configure the items you select on the
left.

AutoKey comes with a few sample phrases and scripts out of the box to give you
an idea of their usage. Phrases are essentially text expanders that enter text
on your behalf when you enter their trigger keys or phrases. On the other hand,
scripts are dynamic and can be programmed using Python to perform more advanced
operations.

We'll show you how to use them in the following sections. But before that, make
sure to set AutoKey to run automatically every time you log in to your
computer, so you don't have to run the app manually every time.

To do this, go to Edit > Preferences. Switch to the General tab and check the
box for Automatically start AutoKey at Login. Click on OK to save the changes.

How to Use AutoKey Phrases

As mentioned above, there are various use-cases where you can use AutoKey
phrases. Now, to show AutoKey phrases in action, let's see how you can set up
an abbreviation to expand text/phrase.

 1. Click on the New button and select Phrase.

 2. Give a name to the phrase and hit OK.
 3. On the right window, click on Enter phrase contents and replace it with the
    text you want to enter when you type its abbreviation.
 4. Click on the Set button beside Abbreviations.

 5. Tap on Add in the Set Abbreviations window and enter the abbreviation with
    which you want to expand the phrase.
 6. Hit the dropdown button for Trigger on and select All non-word.

 7. Hit OK.
 8. In the main window, tap on the Save button.

To ignore the case of typed abbreviation, tick the checkbox next to Ignore case
of typed abbreviation. Similarly, to avoid the need to press a trigger
character, enable the Trigger immediately (don't require a trigger character)
option.

If you’re into software development and want to use certain Python libraries in
your project, you can create a phrase for the same that enters those libraries
into the editor when you type it in.

Moreover, in case you've amassed a lot of such phrases—to a point where it's
hard to remember them—you can assign a hotkey to view a list of all these
phrases and choose one to enter into the text field.

Follow the steps below to do this:

 1. Hit the New button to create a new folder.

 2. Move all the phrases you want to group together to this folder.
 3. Select the folder, and in the Folder Settings on the right, click the Set
    button beside Hotkey.

 4. Choose a modifier key, select Press to Set, and enter a key to generate a
    key combination. Hit OK and save the changes.

Now, all you need to do is hit the hotkey to view all the phrases in the folder
and select the one you want to use.

How to Use AutoKey Scripts

AutoKey scripts come into play when you want to perform more advanced
operations than just text expansion. Using a script, you can run apps, open
files/folders, and control window and mouse events, among other things.

For the purpose of this guide, let's see how you can use an AutoKey script to
open Google Chrome.

 1. Click on the New button and select Script.

 2. Give a name to your script and hit OK.
 3. On the right window, replace # Enter your script code with the following
    lines of code:

     import subprocess
    subprocess.Popen(["usr/bin/google-chrome"])


 4. Hit the Set button next to Hotkey and set a hotkey.

 5. Click OK.

 6. Tap on Save to save your script.

Now, every time you want to run Chrome, hit this hotkey, and it'll execute the
script and launch Chrome.

In the same way that you grouped similar phrases into a folder in the previous
section, you can also group similar scripts to run them easily as needed.

To use scripts effectively, you need to have a working understanding of Python.
Like, for instance, we've used the subprocess module (subprocess management)
to open a new process in the example above. You can learn more about the
subprocess and other modules and components using Python's official documents.

Related: What Is Python's OS Module and How Do You Use It?

Once mastered, you can leverage your Python skills to interact with pretty much
any component of the system and perform tasks at lower levels that would
consume a lot of your time if you chose to go the manual route.

Get More Done With AutoKey

The guide above should've helped you set up AutoKey on your computer and
understand the basic idea behind its working. And going forward, you should be
able to take inspiration from the demonstrated examples above and use AutoKey
phrases and scripts to automate the repetitive and trivial operations on your
system.

If you'd like to explore more options, check out some of the other popular
Linux automation apps before investing in one.

Subscribe to our newsletter
Comments
Share Tweet Share Share Share
Copy
Email
Share
Share Tweet Share Share Share
Copy
Email
Link copied to clipboard
Related Topics

  • Linux
  • Computer Automation
  • Task Automation
  • Linux Apps

About The Author
Yash Wate (79 Articles Published)
   

Yash is a Staff Writer at MUO for DIY, Linux, and Security. Before finding his
passion in writing, he used to develop for the web and iOS. You can also find
his writing on TechPP, where he covers other verticals.

Close

Poll

Do you prefer to call, text, or video call your friends?

( )
Call
30%, 1387 votes
( )
Text
57%, 2626 votes
( )
Video call
13%, 612 votes
Total Votes: 4625
Vote View results Discuss this poll

  • New Year

  • Online Shopping

 

8 Month-Long Online Fitness Challenges to Start the New Year Strong

1 day ago

 

8 New Year’s Resolutions That Focus on Improving Your Overall Wellness

2 days ago

 

Avoid Toxic New Year Diet Culture With These 5 Self-Improvement and
Body-Neutral Apps

3 days ago
See More

 

How Does Back Market Work, and Is It Legit?

6 hours ago

 

Is Trip.com a Legitimate Travel Business?

2 days ago

 

5 Ways to Save on Your Online Christmas Shopping

Dec 19, 2022
See More

Trending Now

 

How to Create a Compound Interest Calculator in Excel

 

How to Write a Company Profile (Plus Samples and Templates to Aid You)

 

How to Take Screenshots on Android When the App Doesn't Allow It

  • Write For Us
  • Home
  • Contact Us
  • Terms
  • Privacy
  • Copyright
  • About Us
  • Fact Checking Policy
  • Corrections Policy
  • Ethics Policy
  • Ownership Policy
  • Partnership Disclaimer
  • Official Giveaway Rules

Copyright © 2022 www.makeuseof.com
 
